# RHHMM
Spatially enhanced differential RNA methylation analysis from affinity-based sequencing data with hidden Markov model

Abstract
Recent studies suggest that post-transcriptional RNA modifications play a crucial role in regulating gene expression. With the development of sequencing technology, the entire N6-methyl-adenosine (m6A) RNA methylome can now be unbiased profiled with methylated RNA immune-precipitation sequencing technique (MeRIP-Seq), making it possible to detect differential methylation states of RNA between two conditions. However, as an affinity-based method, MeRIP-Seq has yet provided base-pair resolution, i.e., a single methylation site (of width ranging from 100bp to 100kbp) determined from MeRIP-Seq data can in practice contains multiple methylation residuals, some of which can be regulated by different enzymes and thus differentially methylated between two conditions. Since existing peak-based methods could not effectively differentiate multiple methylation residuals located within a single methylation site, we propose a hidden Markov model (HMM) based approach to address this issue. Specifically, the detected RNA methylation site is further divided into multiple adjacent small bins and then scanned with higher resolution. The dependency between spatially adjacent bins is enhanced with a hidden Markov model for improved accuracy in detection of differential methylated regions (DMRs), which can be within a single methylation site. In this way, the DMRs can be identified with higher specificity. We tested the proposed algorithm on both simulated data and on real data. Result suggests that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing peak-based approach and detect differential methylation regions with higher statistical significance.
